I want to discuss how a mortgage works
so we can discuss financing the purchase
of your house or your apartment
or your investment properties in the future.
Now, a mortgage is a loan usually
from a bank for a very large amount.
It's kind of like issuing a coupon bond
to the mortgage company.
A mortgage is often for about 30 years.
You have 30 years to pay the mortgage back.
You pay every month usually for the life of the loan.
So in this case, 30 years times 12 months
equals 360 mortgage payments.
In the United States, you can deduct the interest
on your mortgage so that your taxable income is lower.
Most other countries don't let you do this
and there are pros and cons to this.
The pro is that it can be relatively cheap to finance
buying a house or an apartment in the United States.
The con is that this can sometimes lead
to people taking on far too much debt,
meaning the mortgage is too big.
There's four main types of mortgages that I want to discuss.
Number one.
An interest-only mortgage.
I do not advise doing this one
because you're not paying off the house
at all with these payments.
You're only paying off the interest on the loan.
That's it.
This has been quite popular in the United States
because you can deduct the interest you pay on your house
in the United States, unlike other countries.
The problem is that you are not increasing the amount
of equity, your ownership, that you have in your house
with each mortgage payment.
So it feels a lot like a rent agreement in some ways.
Number two.
The second type of mortgage is the 30-year fixed mortgage,
which I love, and in some countries,
you can get longer periods of time than 30 years.
And if you can get a 30-year mortgage
at a fixed interest rate over 30 years, of course,
then this is the one that I personally prefer.
Now, what I mean by fixed is that the interest rate
remains fixed or the same amount over the entire life
of the 30-year mortgage or however many years it is
so that there are no surprises or no surprise increases
in the monthly payments, which occurs to many people
that have variable instead of fixed mortgages.
So just be careful please, with the variable,
meaning the non-fixed mortgages.
Meaning a variable one is deadly because the teaser rate
they tell you at first, kind of like a credit card,
seems really really attractive,
and then once that teaser rate expires,
then rates can go up a lot, kind of like with credit cards.
We talked about APR with credit cards earlier.
Sometimes credit card companies will say only 1.9% interest.
You'll sign up and you didn't read the fine prints
or I didn't and six months go by, and it's actually 20% now.
If you decide to go with a variable rate mortgage
instead of a fixed rate mortgage, please understand
and calculate what the worst case scenario will be
for your budget if interest rates spike
and make sure to ask the mortgage broker
a gazillion questions so that you understand
what your absolute maximum monthly payments
will be if interest rates spike.
Some mortgages that are variable in nature
have interest rate caps of 3% which means
that's they can't go up more than 3%.
So if you get a 5% mortgage, the most it can float
or go up variable wise is 3% to 8, but read the fine print.
Just make sure to calculate what your maximum payment
will be in the worst case scenario.
Separately, if rates drop, you can usually refinance
very quickly in many countries as governments take our side,
meaning us homeowners or people that want to buy homes,
government takes our sides more often and less so the banks
as governments often try to protect the consumer,
especially after '08.
Number three.
The third type of mortgage I want to discuss is
a 15-year fixed mortgage, which of course similar
to a 30-year mortgage, but obviously for much less time.
Given the shorter duration, the monthly payments are higher.
And in the next lesson, we're going to discuss
a mortgage exercise and you can play around
with the durations, meaning the time periods of a mortgage
to see what happens to your payments
if the time period changes
and or if you change the interest rates.
Number four.
The fourth type of mortgage I would like to discuss is
a mortgage that does not have a fixed interest rate,
meaning that the rate on this mortgage floats,
meaning it's variable.
It can go up or down all the time
if interest rates increase.
I already talked a little bit about this one,
but just drill down to make sure you understand
in detail what this means.
These floating mortgages are called ARMs,
which stands adjustable rate mortgage,
and they can be so dangerous, man.
They can be really dangerous
if there is no cap on the amount that the loan can go up.
Many people get accommodation
of different types of mortgages.
They'll try to get a big part of it for 30-year fixed
and a smaller part for different amounts,
because they can get better rates.
So some people get 1, 3, 5, 7, or 10 year ARMs
and combine them.
Anyway, just make sure you understand
what you're getting yourself into.
Just understand what the maximum amount
the mortgage can increase.
If the rate floats and if you can
or cannot afford that payment,
in the most conservative scenario possible for you, please.
And some mortgages are not allowed to increase more than 3%,
but that 3%, it sounds like a small amount.
It can actually be enormous.
So just, we're gonna talk about an example
of this in the next lecture.
And you can get an additional mortgage
on your house if you need the cash.
People say, "I have a second mortgage on my house"
or "a home equity loan."
That's what they call it now.
They don't call it "second mortgages" much anymore.
They call it the home equity loan.
Please don't do that.
I'm really against this.
If you can, right.
As it kind of treats your most prized possession,
your house, as an ATM or bank machine.
It's just too risky unless you absolutely cannot live
without doing this second mortgage
or God forbid you have a big medical bill.
Please make sure that you watch the insurance lectures
earlier in the course if you haven't done so already.
I'd love for you to, if possible, have insurance,
especially homeowner's insurance as well.
Just prepare for the worst.
And I'm always.
My job, I feel like, is to give you a menu
of what to pick but also to be conservative as well.
Now, the last thing that I want to reiterate
about mortgages is that you can refinance,
meaning pay less money for your mortgage loan
if interest rates decrease.
So that's why we talked about interest rates
and that's why I want you
to watch interest rates closely in your country
and always watch what the U.S. Federal Reserve is doing,
because quite often, when the United States or the E.U.,
big blocks, when they change interest rates,
the rest of the world feels that sneeze.
So if those big countries, or big economic trading blocks
like the E.U. or the United States change interest rates,
just make sure you know what you're getting yourself into.
If they cut interest rates, which I don't think they'll do
anytime soon, then you wanna refinance pretty quickly.
Now we understand why we spent so much time talking
about interest rates in part three of the course.